1.Listing and Navigating Directories
ls – List files in a directory.
ls -a → Show hidden files.
ls -l → Show detailed file info.
ls -lh → Human-readable file sizes.
ls -R → Recursive listing (subdirectories).
pwd – Print working directory.
cd – Change directory.
cd /home/user → Change to a specific directory.
cd .. → Move up one directory.
cd - → Return to the previous directory.
tree – Display directories in a tree-like format.

1.2 Creating, Moving, and Deleting Files
touch – Create an empty file or update a timestamp.
touch file.txt → Create a new file.
mkdir – Create a directory.
mkdir newdir → Create a single directory.
mkdir -p dir1/dir2 → Create nested directories.
cp – Copy files or directories.
cp file1 file2 → Copy a file.
cp -r dir1 dir2 → Copy a directory recursively.
mv – Move or rename files.
mv oldfile newfile → Rename a file.
mv file /path/to/dir/ → Move a file.
rm – Remove files or directories.
rm file.txt → Delete a file.
rm -r folder/ → Delete a directory recursively.
rm -f file.txt → Force delete a file without confirmation.
rmdir – Remove an empty directory.

2. File Viewing and Manipulation
cat – Display file contents.
cat file.txt → View a file.
cat file1 file2 → Concatenate files.
less – View large files one page at a time.
less file.txt → Open file in less.
head – Display the first few lines of a file.
head -n 20 file.txt → Show first 20 lines.
tail – Display the last few lines of a file.
tail -f logfile.log → Monitor log file in real-time.
wc – Count words, lines, characters.
wc -l file.txt → Count lines.
wc -w file.txt → Count words.
cut – Extract specific columns from a file.
cut -d':' -f1 /etc/passwd → Show usernames from /etc/passwd.
awk – Pattern scanning and text processing.
awk '{print $1}' file.txt → Print first column.
sed – Stream editor for text replacement.
sed 's/old/new/g' file.txt → Replace "old" with "new".

3. File Permissions and Ownership
ls -l – View file permissions.
chmod – Change file permissions.
chmod 755 file.sh → Set read, write, execute for owner; read, execute for others.
chmod u+x file.sh → Add execute permission for owner.
chown – Change file ownership.
chown user:group file.txt → Change owner and group.
umask – Set default permissions.
umask 022 → Set default permissions to 755.

4. Process Management
ps aux – View active processes.
top – Monitor system performance.
htop – Interactive process viewer.
kill PID – Kill a process by ID.
pkill process – Kill a process by name.
nice -n 10 process – Run a process with lower priority.
renice -5 PID – Change the priority of a running process.

5. Disk and Storage Management
df -h – Show disk space usage.
du -sh – Show directory size.
mount /dev/sdb1 /mnt – Mount a drive.
umount /mnt – Unmount a drive.
fdisk -l – List partition details.

6. Networking Commands
ip a – Show network interfaces.
ping google.com – Test network connectivity.
traceroute google.com – Show packet path.
netstat -tulnp – Show network connections.
nmap -sS target.com – Scan open ports.
7. Package Management

7.1 Debian-based (APT)
apt update – Refresh package index.
apt upgrade – Upgrade installed packages.
apt install package – Install a package.
7.2 RHEL-based (YUM/DNF)
dnf update – Update packages.
dnf install package – Install a package.

8. User Management
whoami – Show current user.
id – Show user ID and groups.
useradd newuser – Add a new user.
passwd user – Change user password.
usermod -aG sudo user – Add user to sudo group.
groupadd newgroup – Create a new group.
groupdel oldgroup – Delete a group.

9. System Logs and Monitoring
journalctl -xe – View system logs.
dmesg – View kernel messages.
sysctl -a – Show system parameters.

10. Git Version Control
git init – Initialize a repository.
git clone repo_url – Clone a repository.
git add . – Stage changes.
git commit -m "message" – Commit changes.
git push origin branch_name – Push changes to remote.
git pull origin branch_name – Pull updates from remote.
git status – Show repository status.
git log – View commit history.

11. Docker and Containers
docker ps – List running containers.
docker images – List available images.
docker run -d image_name – Run a container in detached mode.
docker stop container_id – Stop a container.
docker rm container_id – Remove a container.
docker rmi image_name – Remove an image.
